---
title: On beauty
lede: Before you can generate new insights, you have to wander. How does one perform this wandering thing? Start by aimlessly doing nothing. In other words, practice boredom. 
published: false
tweet: https://twitter.com/callumflack
---

_This is a letter I wrote as a reply to this tweet:_

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Words can destroy BEAUTY.<br><br>Why?<br><br>Words are processed differently than non-words.<br><br>Literate people can&#39;t avoid reading.<br><br>Example: Look at these two paintings<br><br>One painting has words. The other doesn&#39;t. <br><br>When we add words, the beauty DISAPPEARS.<br><br>(h/t <a href="https://twitter.com/sarahdoingthing?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@sarahdoingthing</a>)<br><br>👇👇👇 <a href="https://t.co/gq4sZvCGyw">pic.twitter.com/gq4sZvCGyw</a></p>&mdash; ᴅᴀᴠɪᴅ ᴘᴇʀᴇʟʟ ✌ (@david_perell) <a href="https://twitter.com/david_perell/status/998380882250608645?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 21, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I think that most think that wonder and beauty need to be _nice_.

So what is "beauty"? For one thing, it's subjective. I would say that most of what excites me is a search for beauty, as I define it for myself.

For example, when collecting records, the search is an endless effort that depends on being extremely open and having the wherewithall to listen to a huge pile of crap, and listen to _every single song_ and try to skip thru multiple parts of said song. All because you never know, where or when songs change into some small moment of "beauty", or if the whole song has some kind of beauty. Often I need to listen to it for years before it suddenly becomes _a jam_.

For me, beauty is found in the "things inbetween". In noticing what is in plain sight but not seen. Finding a great song on a weird record does that for me. William Eggleston's photographs of derelict buildings do that for me. Typography does too — the opening titles to "The Beguiled" or "Age of Innocence". (I have a million more examples. We all do).

I've also been enjoying Sarah Perry's articles of late. I put off reading them for a long time but suddenly they're making a whole lot of sense to me. But now I'm sure her "deep laziness" article will be a cornerstone for my work from here on. Her writing is introducing new concepts to me that I knew about but not by "name". Ideas like sacredness and ritual. And so I've just started reading C. Alexander's "Pattern Language", which again, I had not gotten to for years.

As you can tell, my background is not as an "explainer" of "beauty", more a "doer" of beauty. But it seems that what is obvious to me is not obvious to others. I think that has been a frustration of mine for a long time. With my attempts at writing beginning only this year (I've never blogged before) it's helping me clarify a bit of a mission alongside some personal realisations. That being, unless I write to explain explictly my ideas, then a) I'm not wholly aware of them myself and b) I can't have discussions with other people about these ideas.

I violently agree with you that the linguistic system is a hindrance to "seeing beauty". For example, I love how David Lynch plainly refuses to explain his work. That's it right there, Lynch sure knows it.

Unless of course, you find the sacred in literature, which is made up of words… So perhaps I can say it's not "words" that destroy beauty, but logical/deliberate thinking — when everything must be understood and that infromation acted on, we rely on that linguistic system. But running only on this system means we're blind to wonder. Which, as I say in my blog, starts with being open to the world with aimless wandering, then wonderment, then collecting the wonders somehow into a cabinet of curiosities aka wunderkammer (see https://callumflack.blog/wander-wonder-wunder). This is just how I see it. It means that I'm mostly incentizived to make "beautiful" things. And I kinda run on the Buckminster Fuller idea that "when I am working on a problem, I never think about beauty but when I have finished, if the solution is not beautiful, I know it is wrong"

This is why I'm interested in your ideas of "beauty".
