---
title: The instantaneous language of beauty
lede: Blah… 
published: true
tweet: https://twitter.com/callumflack
---

@[MarkdownImage](post local src="/images/aesthetics-nembrotha-aurea.jpg")

A shadow passes just outside our field of vision. But somehow we know it happened because we feel tense. Some sense has triggered our awareness, a sense that isn't logical, a sense that we instead _feel_.

We sense the world before we are consciously aware of it through instinctive reactions to the aesthetics of our environment. We understand these reactions in ourselves emotionally. We do this well before we have time to use our linguistic system to think and create meaning. And we do it unconsciously, like breathing, every second of our waking lives.

This happens quickly. At a glance, we notice and assess the multitude of patterns before us. When a pattern signals danger, we feel immediately that "something isn't quite right" even though we can't "put our finger on it". And when a pattern draws us in, we feel it's beauty and our curiosity.

Like a shadow felt but not consciously seen, we're hardly aware that the language of aesthetics is our first mode of understanding the world.

@[MarkdownImage](post local src="/images/aesthetics-snake.jpg")

# Danger and beauty

When we use language, we have to think. We have to choose words, connect ideas, assemble metaphors, and then speak them. Verbal language and thinking is expensive. We use aesthetics to give us answers before we consciously start thinking. We rely on aesthetics to make very fast decisions based on a library of intuitons built over a lifetime. The language of aesthetics is pre-verbal by necessity.

When we find symmetry in a scene to be dangerous, like the snake above, then we are electrified, instantly ready to react and avoid danger. All consciousness is focussed on the danger.

When we find symmetry in a scene to be pleasing, then we are calm, ready to begin investigating the scene. We may describe the scene as _interesting_ or _beautiful_ and begin consciously understanding it.

We are _drawn to beauty_ and _repelled by danger_.

Danger and beauty are the two extremes on the spectrum of the language of aesthetics. When we sense danger, we do not think. Instead we react to avoid the situation. Beauty, however, invites us to think. To find beauty is to find information we can use in our favour.

@[MarkdownImage](post local src="/images/aesthetics-siphonophore-apolemia.jpg")

<!-- caption="A Blue-ringed Octopus displays blue iridescent rings across their yellow-colored body when disturbed, hunting or mating. When calm, it displays an overall yellowish-beige colouration without any visible blue rings." -->

# Beauty invites participation

We understand danger overtly. Our body reacts like an electricity switch, automatically overriding the need for conceptual thought. Beauty, however, is far more subtle. Beauty invites. _Beauty is a lure._

Predators often use beauty to their advantage. The Siphonophone (above) is an exotic creature, even to it's prey. Spiralling itself across a larger space to attract whatever may pass, it invites curiosity and investigation. Each tentacle can sting, sedate and consume. There is no warning here. Only beauty.

Like reaction time is the defense for a target animal, a beautiful invitation is a weapon for those seeking targets. The Siphonophone uses beauty to prey, eat and survive. While predation is a zero-sum game, other games are not. Flowers also use beauty to attract partners in their gene dispersion scheme, and every participant wins.

_Beauty invites participation and attention._

@[MarkdownImage](post local src="/images/aesthetics-blackberries.jpg")

# Beauty signifies opportunity

<!--It's been said that humans evolved large brains primarily to keep track of gossip within social circles as we began to live in larger groups. -->

As pattern-matchers, we seek beauty because beautiful things signify opportunity. Like all animals, we intuitively know that beauty says "this thing has potential, it's worth investigating". From pain to pleasure, beauty is the subtle, calm opposite that invites us to think and act.

When found ripe by pre-agricultural humans, the bulging blackberries (above) would have been gorged before another animal could make use of the opportunity. The first glimpse of the berries on the tree would have elicited hushed enthusiasm, then quick maneuvering to capitalise on the scene.

Creativity is often misunderstood. We think it requires some form of talent or genius when, in fact, every human is innately predisposed to creatively find and exploit beauty. We just get hung up on concepts like "creative genius" because, as social animals, we hunger for status. But before beauty is given over to the subjective interpretation of _taste_—taste is essentially a status display mechanism for our social structures—it has already triggered a calm and curious feeling that leads us to believe "_this is interesting and worth my attention_".

In this way, a spreadsheet can absolutely contain beauty.

_Humans naturally seek beauty in order to make use of it._

@[MarkdownImage](post local src="/images/aesthetics-instapumps.jpg")

# Irrational beauty matters more than we dare admit

Our irrational response to primal beauty is the reason why advertising sells not to our intellect but to our emotional feelings: "you’ll feel better when you have this". It's why people will say "I'll know it when I see it" even though they can't explain what they're looking for. It's why a picture is worth a thousand words. It's what Buckminster Fuller meant when he said "if the solution is not beautiful, I know it is wrong."

It's why I can tell you to think of the brilliantly patterned sea slug that introduced this post, and then use creative metaphor to describe the above picture of Reebok Instapumps as _venomous_, and I know you'll understand me.

<!-- and know you'll understand me somewhat more easily than you would have at the start of this article. That's because I know you've seen the brilliantly patterned sea slug that introduced the article—which despite being beautiful we'd be hesitant to touch—and I'm drawing out that residual feeling of it's beauty in your recent memory to make my word-play.-->

<!--The most profitable company in history is adamant the gaps between the building-high glass panels encasing it's 461 metre diameter be "no greater than 1/32 inch (0.8mm)". Apple's value is due to a deep understanding of how beauty -->

By accessing the language of aesthetics, we know good from bad in an instant. By accessing our innate feelings for beauty, we find ways to leverage our environments. Only when it feels right do we begin listening, interpreting and planning.

<!--Words mostly do not convey the feelings of beauty. Seeing—and sensing—is much easier than explaining.-->

<!--This is why design matters. Given Design, at it's best, uses the language of aesthetics to preempt verbal language and communicate much faster than any reason can.-->

When you're struggling to invite attention or create participation, remember that
