---
title: Blogging is a scenius thing
lede: I seemed to have started this blog by writing about why I've started a blog. To continue the theme, let's talk about why blogging is a scenius thing. 
published: true
note: <ol><li>This phrase is an "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ouroboros">ouroboros</a>"—it eats itself. An ouroboros is much fun! I hope to play with them a fair bit on this blog.</li></ol>
tweet: https://twitter.com/callumflack
---

I seemed to have started this blog by writing about why I've started a blog.<span class="Fn">1</span> To continue the theme, I have another scrap to explore. But first, a quick recap of the previous two post's concepts:

* Do habits, avoid outcome-based goals.
* Goals involve belief in a future event, just like fate.
* Belief is important but not when you can't act on new information happening in front of you.
* Each of us are a society within. Don't presume yours goals or habits or indeed any thought to be the result of a single rational voice.
* Any new thought, action or resulting habit involves risk.
* Writing about curious things is a risk that may result in a pile of crap.

I'll also state here that I reserve the right _not to get to the point_—that's part of why I'm blogging. In order to see what resonates, I have to play around with whatever comes to mind. There is no goal here. Maybe there will be an outcome or two, but only once play has stopped.

So why write in public, risking this curious shit?

Below is a 3 minute video of Brian Eno in a brilliant green jacket, where he discusses "scenius", the creative intelligence of a community.

> I think that although great new ideas are articulated by individuals, they’re nearly always generated by communities.

Every genius came from a scenius. For every Kraftwerk, there was a Krautrock. As
Austin Kleon aphorises, "[genius is an egosystem, scenius is an ecosystem](https://austinkleon.com/2017/05/12/scenius/)".

@[MarkdownMovie](monitorRatio videoId="d-53tzx69fM")

Ignoring the uninteresting "genius" part, my blogging is a public output I hope to learn from with the help of others. So if you're reading this and feel a stinging need to comment, please tweet or email me. Even if just to say the colour of shit has changed, _I want your scenius_.
